# Create and manage a blog using Jekyll hosted on GitHub Pages

## Index

- [Create and manage a blog using Jekyll hosted on GitHub Pages](#create-and-manage-a-blog-using-jekyll-hosted-on-github-pages)
  - [Index](#index)
  - [Introduction](#introduction)
  - [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
  - [Steps](#steps)
    - [Create empty repository](#create-empty-repository)
      - [gitattributes file](#gitattributes-file)
      - [gitignore file](#gitignore-file)
  - [Create a Codespace](#create-a-codespace)
  - [Create and configure Jekyll static website using Codespaces](#create-and-configure-jekyll-static-website-using-codespaces)
  - [References](#references)

## Introduction

This document describes the steps required for hosting my blog on GitHub Pages using Jekyll. I will use GitHub Codespaces to manage my blog

## Prerequisites

- An empty (public) repository on your GitHub account named `<username>.github.io`. (in lowercase)
- Knowledge of Git, GitHub, VSCode and a little bit of Linux

## Steps

### Create empty repository

If not already done so, create an empty repository on GitHub using `<username>.github.io` as the name. Be sure to add a README.MD file during creation.

I always create a `.gitattributes` and `.gitignore` file, which I advise you to do as well.

#### gitattributes file

Below is the `.gitattributes` content

```bash
* text=auto eol=lf
```

This will make sure that git properly handles line endings, regardless of Operating system differences. More information can be found here: 

- [Configuring Git to handle line endings | GitHub Docs](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/getting-started-with-git/configuring-git-to-handle-line-endings)

#### gitignore file

Below is the content of the `.gitignore` file:

```bash
# Secrets and Keys
*.key
*.cer
*.pem
*.pfx

# Backup files
*.bak

# Ignore folders generated by Bundler
.bundle/
vendor/

# Jekyll files
_site/
.sass-cache/
.jekyll-cache/
.jekyll-metadata

# Logs
*.log

# Temp files
*.tmp

# Vscode
.vscode/
```

This will make sure that certain folders and files will not be committed to your repository, like temp files and secrets. This is a precaution I always make when creating a new repository. There are loads of prebuild `.gitignore` files, depending on your need. More information can be found here:

- [gitignore file | Git docs](https://git-scm.com/docs/gitignore)
- [Ignoring files | GitHub Docs](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/getting-started-with-git/ignoring-files)
- [A collection of .gitignore templates | GitHub](https://github.com/github/gitignore)

## Create a Codespace

- From within your repository on GitHub.
- Using the Code menu pick the Codespaces tab and select Create.
  - This will spin up a Codespaces container and open a new tab in your browser with a VSCode web ISE.
- Using the Codespaces button in the corner to get the command palette, select ***Add Dev Container Configuration Files***. Then selected ***New Configuration***.
- Chose to Show All definitions then search for and select Jekyll. I picked the default bullseye definition and didn’t choose any additional options.
- I then rebuild the codespace using the Codespaces button in the lower left corner and selecting ***Rebuild Container***
- You can validate required components are installed using these commands:
  - `ruby -v`
  - `gcc -v`
  - `make -v`
  - `jekyll -v`

## Create and configure Jekyll static website using Codespaces

- From within your codespaces, make sure you are in the root of your folder (`workspaces/<username>.github.io`) on the main branch. (At this point, you shouldn't have any sub folders or additional branches yet)
- Create a docs folder to host your Jekyll site.
  - `mkdir docs`
- Initialize a new Jekyll project from the docs folder
  - `cd docs``
  - `jekyll new --skip-bundle`
- Open and edit the `Gemfile`
  - Comment the `gem "jekyll"` line
  - Uncomment the `gem github-pages` line and change it to include the latest gem version of GitHub pages, which can be found on this page: [Dependency versions | GitHub Pages](https://pages.github.com/versions/). At the time of writing, this was `228`
- Run `bundle update` to install your dependencies. This will create `Gemfile.lock`
- Add the webrick dependency manually, as this is no longer installed by default with Ruby 3.x
  - `bundle add webrick`
- Test your site locally by the following command:
  - `bundle exec jekyll serve --livereload`

> This should open a new tab with a preview of your site. It should be completely default now. You can use `[Ctrl] + c` to stop.

Below is the Gemfile configuration after the above steps

```bash
source "https://rubygems.org"
# Hello! This is where you manage which Jekyll version is used to run.
# When you want to use a different version, change it below, save the
# file and run `bundle install`. Run Jekyll with `bundle exec`, like so:
#
#     bundle exec jekyll serve
#
# This will help ensure the proper Jekyll version is running.
# Happy Jekylling!
# gem "jekyll", "~> 4.3.2"
# This is the default theme for new Jekyll sites. You may change this to anything you like.
gem "minima", "~> 2.5"
# If you want to use GitHub Pages, remove the "gem "jekyll"" above and
# uncomment the line below. To upgrade, run `bundle update github-pages`.
gem "github-pages", "~> 228", group: :jekyll_plugins
# If you have any plugins, put them here!
group :jekyll_plugins do
  gem "jekyll-feed", "~> 0.12"
end

# Windows and JRuby does not include zoneinfo files, so bundle the tzinfo-data gem
# and associated library.
platforms :mingw, :x64_mingw, :mswin, :jruby do
  gem "tzinfo", ">= 1", "< 3"
  gem "tzinfo-data"
end

# Performance-booster for watching directories on Windows
gem "wdm", "~> 0.1.1", :platforms => [:mingw, :x64_mingw, :mswin]

# Lock `http_parser.rb` gem to `v0.6.x` on JRuby builds since newer versions of the gem
# do not have a Java counterpart.
gem "http_parser.rb", "~> 0.6.0", :platforms => [:jruby]

gem "webrick", "~> 1.8"
```

> **NOTE** If the site works, do yourself a favour and commit these changes to main before making making any changes. This way, you will be able to easily revert to the original configuration and see any changes since then.

## References

- [Setting up a GitHub Pages site with Jekyll | GitHub Docs](https://docs.github.com/en/pages/setting-up-a-github-pages-site-with-jekyll)
- [Creating a GitHub Pages site with Jekyll | GitHub Docs](https://docs.github.com/en/pages/setting-up-a-github-pages-site-with-jekyll/creating-a-github-pages-site-with-jekyll)
- [Build A Portfolio With A Blog Using GitHub Pages | Simon Dosda blog](https://simondosda.github.io/posts/2021-09-13-blog-github-pages-1-introduction.html)
- [Using a GitHub Codespace for Jekyll site development | Matthew C Anderson Blog](https://www.matthewcanderson.com/codespace-for-jekyll/)
